.\" Manpage for crabcc.
.\" Render: man ./man/crabcc.1
.\" Install: sudo install -m 0644 man/crabcc.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
.TH CRABCC 1 "April 2026" "crabcc 0.1.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
crabcc \- symbol index for AI coding agents

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B crabcc
[\fB\-\-root\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-\-mcp\fR]
.I COMMAND
[\fIARGS\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B crabcc
is a symbol-aware code-lookup CLI built for LLM agents. It indexes a repository's
symbols (functions, classes, methods, etc.) into a SQLite store at
.IR .crabcc/index.db
and exposes them via four primitives:
.BR sym ,
.BR refs ,
.BR callers ,
.BR outline .
Output is compact JSON tuned for token efficiency.

Languages supported in v0.1: TypeScript, TSX, JavaScript, Ruby.

Compared to
.BR grep (1)
or
.BR find (1):
.IP \[bu] 2
47\(en4400\(mu faster on monorepos (SQL index vs disk scan).
.IP \[bu] 2
85% fewer bytes sent to the LLM in aggregate.
.IP \[bu] 2
Returns structured JSON \(em
.IR file ", " line ", " kind ", " signature ", " parent
\(em
not raw text.

.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-root\  PATH
Repo root. Defaults to the current working directory.
.TP
.B \-\-mcp
Run as an MCP server (JSON-RPC 2.0 over stdio) instead of a one-shot CLI. See
.BR EXAMPLES .

.SH COMMANDS

.SS Indexing
.TP
.B index
Build a fresh index for the repo. Wipes any existing index. Also rebuilds the
Tantivy fuzzy/prefix sidecar.
.TP
.B refresh
Incrementally update the index. mtime + sha256 keyed; ~250 ms no-op on a
13k-file repo.
.TP
.B fts-rebuild
Rebuild only the Tantivy fuzzy/prefix sidecar from the current SQLite index.

.SS Symbol queries
.TP
.BI sym\ NAME
Find a symbol by exact name. Emits a JSON array of
.IR {name, kind, signature, parent, file, line_start, line_end, visibility} .
.TP
.BI refs\ NAME\ [\-\-limit\ N]\ [\-\-files\-only]\ [\-\-count]
Find every identifier reference to
.IR NAME .
Coarse \(em matches text equality on identifier nodes.
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-limit\  N
Cap the full hit list at
.IR N .
0 = unlimited. Early-stops the per-file walk.
.TP
.B \-\-files\-only
Emit a deduped JSON file list only \(em no per-line snippet (~88% smaller).
.TP
.B \-\-count
Emit
.RI {\(dqcount\(dq:\  N }
only (~99.98% smaller).
.RE
.TP
.BI callers\ NAME\ [\-\-limit\ N]\ [\-\-files\-only]\ [\-\-count]
Find call sites of
.IR NAME
\(em both bare
.IR foo()
and method-receiver
.IR obj.foo() .
Same shaping flags as
.BR refs .
.TP
.BI outline\ FILE
List every symbol in
.IR FILE
ordered by line. Use
.IR line_start / line_end
ranges to selectively read portions.
.TP
.BI files\ [\-\-under\ PREFIX]\ [\-\-lang\ LANG]\ [\-\-ext\ EXT]\ [\-\-limit\ N]
List indexed files. Replaces
.BR ls (1)
\fB\-R\fR /
.BR find (1)
\fB\-name\fR.

.SS Approximate name search
.TP
.BI fuzzy\ QUERY\ [\-\-limit\ N]
Levenshtein-distance-2 search over symbol names. Catches typos and plurals.
Default limit: 20.
.TP
.BI prefix\ QUERY\ [\-\-limit\ N]
Case-insensitive starts-with search over symbol names. Default limit: 20.

.SS Telemetry
.TP
.BR track " [" \-\-json ]
Show estimated tokens saved this session, last 24h, and all-time. Saved-token
math is heuristic.
.IR \-\-json
emits a structured object instead of the human-readable table.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I .crabcc/index.db
SQLite store: per-repo. Add to
.IR .gitignore .
.TP
.I .crabcc/tantivy/
Tantivy sidecar: per-repo. Rebuilt by
.B index
or
.BR fts\-rebuild .
.TP
.I ~/.crabcc/usage.log
Global JSONL telemetry log used by
.BR track .
Append-only, never read by other commands.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Tracing log filter. Defaults to
.IR warn .
Set
.IR RUST_LOG=info
for query timings and Tantivy chatter.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.B 0
on success.
.B 1
on indexing or query errors. Errors are written to stderr; stdout JSON is
guaranteed parseable on success.

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Find a symbol
.EX
$ crabcc sym Assessment
[{"name":"Assessment","kind":"class",
  "signature":"class Assessment < ApplicationRecord", ...}]
.EE

.SS Count call sites
.EX
$ crabcc callers find_by --count
{"count":475}
.EE

.SS Just the files referencing X
.EX
$ crabcc refs Assessment --files-only --limit 10
{"files":["app/builders/...", "app/models/...", ...]}
.EE

.SS File outline + jq
.EX
$ crabcc outline app/models/user.rb |
    jq -r '.[] | select(.kind=="method") | "\\(.name)\\t\\(.line_start)"'
.EE

.SS MCP server
.EX
$ printf '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"method":"initialize"}\\n' | crabcc --mcp
.EE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rg (1),
.BR fd (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR grep (1),
.BR find (1).

For prose-style, content-search questions, prefer
.BR rg (1).
For filename glob / by-age questions, prefer
.BR fd (1).
For reshaping crabcc JSON output, pipe through
.BR jq (1).

.B Never
reach for plain
.BR grep " \-rn"
or
.BR find " . \-name"
on a real repo \(em they walk
.IR node_modules/ ,
.IR .git/ ,
and
.IR tmp/ ,
which is slow and noisy.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Peter Lodri. Source: https://github.com/peterlodri/crabcc

.SH BUGS
Report at https://github.com/peterlodri/crabcc/issues.

Known limitations in v0.1:
.IP \[bu] 2
Ruby caller patterns don't catch chained-receiver calls (\fIobj.bar.foo\fR).
.IP \[bu] 2
.B grep
subcommand is a TODO stub.
.IP \[bu] 2
Indexing is single-threaded.
